3.1 WHAT IS A PROCESS?

The design of an operating system (OS) reflects certain general requirements.All multiprogramming  operating  systems, from  single-user  systems  such  as Windows  98  to
mainframe systems such as IBM’s mainframe operating system, z/OS, which can support thousands of users, are built around the concept of the process. Most requirements
that the OS must meet can be expressed with reference to processes:
• The  OS  must  interleave  the  execution  of  multiple  processes, to  maximize
processor utilization while providing reasonable response time.
• The OS must allocate resources to processes in conformance with a specific
policy (e.g., certain functions or applications are of higher priority) while at
the same time avoiding deadlock.
• The OS may be required to support interprocess communication and user creation of processes, both of which may aid in the structuring of applications.
We begin our detailed study of operating systems with an examination of the
way in which they represent and control processes. After an introduction to the concept of a process, the chapter discusses process states, which characterize the behavior
of  processes. Then  we  look  at  the  data  structures  that  the  OS  uses  to  manage
processes. These include data structures to represent the state of each process and
data structures that record other characteristics of processes that the OS needs to
achieve its objectives. Next, we look at the ways in which the OS uses these data
structures to control process execution. Finally, we discuss process management in
UNIX SVR4. Chapter 4 provides more modern examples of process management,
namely Solaris, Windows, and Linux.
Note: In  this  chapter, reference  is  occasionally  made  to  virtual  memory.
Much of the time, we can ignore this concept in dealing with processes, but at certain points in the discussion, virtual memory considerations are pertinent. Virtual
memory is not discussed in detail until Chapter 8; a brief overview is provided in
Chapter 2.
Background
Before defining the term process, it is useful to summarize some of the concepts introduced in Chapters 1 and 2:
1. A computer platform consists of a collection of hardware resources, such as
the processor, main memory, I/O modules, timers, disk drives, and so on.
2. Computer applications are developed to perform some task.Typically, they accept
input from the outside world, perform some processing, and generate output.
3. It is inefficient for applications to be written directly for a given hardware platform.The principal reasons for this are as follows:
    a. Numerous applications can be developed for the same platform.Thus,it makes
    sense to develop common routines for accessing the computer’s resources.
    b. The  processor  itself  provides  only  limited  support  for  multiprogramming.
    Software  is  needed  to  manage  the  sharing  of  the  processor  and  other
    resources by multiple applications at the same time.
    c. When multiple applications are active at the same time, it is necessary to
    protect the data, I/O use, and other resource use of each application from
    the others.
4. The OS was developed to provide a convenient, feature-rich, secure, and consistent interface for applications to use. The OS is a layer of software between
the applications and the computer hardware (Figure 2.1) that supports applications and utilities.
5. We  can  think  of  the  OS  as  providing  a  uniform, abstract  representation  of
resources that can be requested and accessed by applications. Resources include main memory, network interfaces, file systems, and so on. Once the OS
has  created  these  resource  abstractions  for  applications  to  use, it  must  also
manage  their  use. For  example, an  OS  may  permit  resource  sharing  and
resource protection.

Now that we have the concepts of applications, system software, and resources,
we are in a position to discuss how the OS can, in an orderly fashion, manage the execution of applications so that
• Resources are made available to multiple applications.
• The  physical  processor  is  switched  among  multiple  applications  so all will
appear to be progressing.
• The processor and I/O devices can be used efficiently.

PROCESSES AND PROCESS CONTROL BLOCKS

Recall  from  Chapter  2  that  we  suggested  several  definitions  of  the  term  process,
including
• A program in execution.
• An instance of a program running on a computer.
• The entity that can be assigned to and executed on a processor.
• A unit of activity characterized by the execution of a sequence of instructions,
a current state, and an associated set of system resources.
We can also think of a process as an entity that consists of a number of elements.
Two essential elements of a process are program code (which may be shared with
other processes that are executing the same program) and a set of data associated
with that code. Let us suppose that the processor begins to execute this program
code, and we refer to this executing entity as a process. At any given point in time,
while  the  program  is  executing, this  process  can  be  uniquely  characterized  by  a
number of elements, including the following:
• Identifier: A  unique  identifier  associated  with  this  process, to  distinguish  it.
• State: If the process is currently executing, it is in the running state.
• Priority: Priority level relative to other processes.
• Program  counter: The  address  of  the  next  instruction  in  the  program  to  be.
• Memory pointers: Includes pointers to the program code and data associated
with this process, plus any memory blocks shared with other processes.
• Context  data: These  are  data  that  are  present  in  registers  in  the  processor
• I/O status information: Includes outstanding I/O requests, I/O devices (e.g., tape
drives) assigned to this process, a list of files in use by the process, and so on.
• Accounting information: May include the amount of processor time and clock time used,
time limits, account numbers, and so on.
so this ends here.
so this ends here.
so this ends here.

